# Generating TLS Certificates

By default Zizq uses plain HTTP. HTTPS and Mutual TLS can be enabled by
providing the applicable certificates and keys. If you have a server
certificate from a public certificate authority (CA) such as DigiCert, or Let's
Encrypt this should just work. In many cases you may prefer generate and use
your own CA in order to secure the Zizq API. The `zizq` CLI provides utilities
to facilitate certificate generation, both for the server and for client use
with mTLS. This is packaged up under `zizq tls`, which is structured in terms
of subcommands.

See `zizq tls --help` for a full list of options.

## What You Will Need

TLS is inherently bound to hostnames. You will need to know the hostname
through which the Zizq API will be accessed in order to generate a valid
certificate.

Client certificates are more straightforward and are named arbitrarily.

Once you have generated server certificates, there are three necessary files:

1. The CA certificate (the authority that signs and verifies the certificates).
2. The server certificate file.
3. The private key for the server certificate.

If any of these are missing, TLS will not function correctly.

For generated client certificates you need the equivalent:

1. The CA certificate.
2. The client certificate file(s).
3. The private key(s) for the client certificate(s).

The opposite side needs to know the CA in order to verify certificates. For
example, clients need a copy of the CA used by the server in order to verify
the server certificate, and the server needs a copy of the CA used by all
clients in order to verify client certificates. These certificate authorities
can, and often are, the same for both sides.

## Using `zizq tls init`

The `init` subcommand is able to generate a CA, a server certificate and one or
more client certificates in a single command. See `zizq tls init --help`.

Specify `--out-dir` to have the certificates written to a specific output
directory. The default is `{root-dir}/tls`.

Multiple hostnames can be provided by providing `--san` more than once.
Multiple client certificates can be generated by providing `--client` more than
once. There is generally no need to generate a different certificate per
client, however (clients that are all logically the same can share the same
client certificate).

Certificate expiry can be specified by providing `--days N`. The defaul is 365
days.

All server and client certificates will share the same CA.

``` shell
zizq tls init \
    --out-dir certs \
    --san localhost \
    --san zizq.internal \
    --client worker
```

``` text
Generating CA (Zizq CA):
  wrote: certs/ca-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/ca-key.pem
Generating server certificate (SANs: localhost, zizq.internal):
  wrote: certs/server-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/server-key.pem
Generating client certificate (worker):
  wrote: certs/client-worker-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/client-worker-key.pem
```

The common name for the certificate authority can be changed by providing
`--cn`.

Once certificates have been generated, you will likely want to copy those
somewhere stable.

### Configuring the Server for TLS

The server can be configured to use TLS with the generated certificates by
providing `--tls-cert` and `--tls-key`.

``` shell
zizq serve --tls-cert certs/server-cert.pem --tls-key certs/server-key.pem
```

``` text
...
2026-04-07T04:53:43.404716Z  INFO zizq::commands::serve: primary API listening addr=127.0.0.1:7890 scheme=https
...
```

The CA will need to be provided to any clients that want to connect with the
server in order, otherwise verification will fail. With `curl` this is done
with the `--cacert` flag.

``` shell
curl -i --cacert certs/ca-cert.pem  https://zizq.internal:7890/health
```

``` http
HTTP/2 200
content-type: application/json
content-length: 15
date: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 04:55:35 GMT

{"status":"ok"}
```

### Configuring the Server for Mutual TLS

> [!NOTE]
> Mutual TLS support requires a [pro license](https://zizq.io/pricing).

In order for the server to use Mutual TLS, it needs to know the CA for the
certificates clients will present. This is configured with the
`--tls-client-ca` argument.

``` shell
zizq serve \
    --license-key @license.jwt \
    --tls-cert certs/server-cert.pem \
    --tls-key certs/server-key.pem \
    --tls-client-ca certs/ca-cert.pem
```

Client then need to be configured to present their client certificates and use
the matching key. In `curl` this is done with `--cert` and `--key`.

``` shell
curl -i \
    --cacert certs/ca-cert.pem  \
    --cert certs/client-worker-cert.pem \
    --key certs/client-worker-key.pem \
    https://zizq.internal:7890/health
```

``` http
HTTP/2 200
content-type: application/json
content-length: 15
date: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 05:04:53 GMT

{"status":"ok"}
```

### Generating Additional Certificates

Running `zizq tls init` more than once with the same `--out-dir` will not
overwrite existing files by default. This can be done, for example, to
generate an additional client certificate using the existing CA.

``` shell
zizq tls init --out-dir certs --client new-worker
```

``` text
CA already exists, reusing:
  skip: certs/ca-cert.pem (already exists)
  skip: certs/ca-key.pem (already exists)
Generating server certificate (SANs: localhost):
  skip: certs/server-cert.pem (already exists)
  skip: certs/server-key.pem (already exists)
Generating client certificate (new-worker):
  wrote: certs/client-new-worker-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/client-new-worker-key.pem
```

## Using `zizq tls ca`

If you want to generate a CA separately, use `zizq tls ca`. See
`zizq tls ca --help`.

``` shell
zizq tls ca --out-dir certs
```

``` text
Generating CA (Zizq CA):
  wrote: certs/ca-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/ca-key.pem
```

This CA can be explicitly provided to `zizq tls server-cert` or
`zizq tls client-cert`.

## Using `zizq tls server-cert`

To generate a new server certificate (e.g. to use a different hostname/SAN),
use `zizq tls server-cert`. See `zizq tls server-cert --help`.

This commands requires `--ca-cert` and `--ca-key` and accepts one or more
`--san` names.

``` shell
zizq tls server-cert \
    --out-dir certs \
    --ca-cert certs/ca-cert.pem \
    --ca-key certs/ca-key.pem \
    --san localhost \
    --san zizq.new.internal
```

``` text
Generating server certificate (SANs: localhost, zizq.new.internal):
  wrote: certs/server-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/server-key.pem
```

## Using `zizq tls client-cert`

To generate a new client certificate, use `zizq tls client-cert`. See
`zizq tls client-cert --help`.

This command requires `--ca-cert`, `--ca-key` and the client name.

``` shell
zizq tls client-cert \
    --out-dir certs \
    --ca-cert certs/ca-cert.pem \
    --ca-key certs/ca-key.pem \
    --name external-worker
```

``` text
Generating client certificate (external-worker):
  wrote: certs/client-external-worker-cert.pem
  wrote: certs/client-external-worker-key.pem
```
